(also) pip install requests, bs4, pillow, google
https://longreads.com/2019/01/22/the-heartbeat-of-wounded-knee/

ideas:

what does it mean to be a content aggregator? platform. classpass? spotify?
collectivize subscriptions?
	person A buys NYT, person B WSJ
	they share articles. subscritions are 'grouped'
	maybe enforce that each user has a subcription to *a publication
	remit payments to publishers proportional to articles read
	or if they 'pay' then that money goes into a pool that pays publishers

survey/get reader info when signup (where from. howlong studying? are they a regular reader of any of papers (this last point can be used to drive value. especially on the 'learn english' site. englisht that is translated back to them.ie, readers who otherwise would not read these sources -spanish readers etc.))

maybe categoriza vcab by importance (frequency)
same as above - with definitions at top of articles. sort of a 'what to expect' section.

profile(account)page:
recommended articles (even if 'not enough data')
recently read articles

don't forget about a/b testing
harvard business review articles
blogs <- might be easiest ppl to reach out to (for licensing)


to do:
user_page('profile')  - can just start with articles read. maybe an optional button for 'read whole article/did not read whole article' would be a start.<-button can go at end of article. no need to annouce it elsewhere. boolean model field
accounts - articles read, vocab_stuff,  ?(achievements)

subscritions:
the athletic
wsj
nytimes
washpo

---
before deploy: don't forget to get SSL(?) certificate (explained in gunicorn/django/virtualenv/etc setp tutorial).

periodically run a (is it a routine? - cron job? celery task?) that will update the '_800_most_common_words.txt' file and also populate each articlewords model with correct most_common_words-field data. again, so that it is not computed on the fly as is currently done with the 'views bit' function and can instead just be a model query.

'media' is dying. that is a good thing. we want to accelerate that. to help that to happen. logan green quote about seeing the future. what unexpected good things will come from the consolidation. the good ones will become stronger.
in the new environment. with new technology. the world we live in today. would traditional news look how it does now if it were just invented? of course not. so let's help it adapt to new environment. legacy news is just that - legacy.

maybe make totally free.
you need an invite to join. one invite per person. ask for sponsorships/donations.
active email to participate.
need to re-up the email to make sure it is active. and can solicit more donations from there.
maybe for each 'membership', a kid gets a 'membership' too.